When I was thinking about how to start the panel, I couldn't find a practical way to bring up the topic we're going to talk about today, but after listening to Barbara, uh, especially the last section, the last part, the last sentence about how we have only one objective, but there are many paths.
So, I'd like to
briefly frame what we're going to talk about
today, which is, uh, natural capital.  Is it
okay there?  Okay, so it's natural capital,
like one of those paths, right?  Uh,
natural capital is a way of
conceptualizing nature, one way,
one of the many ways in which we
can conceptualize it.  Uh, it comes
mainly from the area of ​​economics and
strategy.  And the objective of
conceptualizing natural capital in this way has to
do with the fact that it greatly facilitates
management, which is very complex, but it
greatly facilitates management and facilitates
dialogue between different
actors, which is the beauty of this panel, because we
are bringing together many of these
actors to talk about this topic
which is super interesting.  Already.  Uh,
we have a top-notch panel today with
different perspectives.  And the objective is,
as it says on the screen, to talk
about natural capital,
public policies and the role of the private sector,
which I come from the Faculty of Economics
and Business, I am the director of the Center for
Business Sustainability and for
us it is fundamental in our work to
make this
particular approach.  So, without further ado, let me
tell you who is joining us today.
We have Victor Caro, who is president
of the Natural Capital Committee and director
of the Environmental Economics Division.  from the
Directorate of Information and
Environmental Economics of the Ministry of the
Environment.  Victor will be joining us today
.  We have Alejandra Figueroa
joining us from the UNDP, and
Alex, an old acquaintance, a friend from many
internal and external battles,
right?  She comes from the Faculty of
Engineering at the University of
Development and Daniela Bombino, who
joins us today from Tilma.   I
no longer know what I have this sheet for.  We'll do it
however we can.  So,
today's objective is to have a
conversation around
three structuring axes that we have
defined, and what we would be interested in is
having your opinion regarding
natural capital in
these different visions.  Excuse me.
So, to get started and get down to
business, I'd like to begin with some
questions; these will be questions that are
relevant to all the panelists.
The idea is that we have a
conversation, that we can discuss and
exchange opinions.  And the first thing is
from the
different perspectives in which
you operate, from the
private sector, international organizations,
Alex from academia and Victor from the
public sector, very very active in the
area of ​​natural capital.
What does natural capital mean to you
and how do you integrate it into your
work?
In order to give some
context to this question, I would first ask you to
tell us about your daily activities,
what you do for a living, and how you spend
your time, okay?  And how the focus on
natural capital is present in its
activities.  So, let's start with
Yes, please tell us.   It's done
.  Hello, it's a pleasure to be
here today.  Thank you so much.  and an
honor to represent this
beautiful tea company.  You saw a
little bit in the video, our reason for
being is to deliver authentic tea.  And
authentic Deon tea is only possible in a
biodiverse environment.  For us, the
brand was created.  Dilma is the only
brand I know of created to
positively impact people's lives
.  and the environment, and for
this reason we donate 15% of our
profits to these initiatives.
And without biodiversity, as Barbara so
aptly explained to us, there is
no tea, and without tea we would not exist, there is no
Dilma.  Thank you.  And in
terms of the
company's management, in terms of
daily operations, how is the concept of
natural capital or concern for
biodiversity integrated into
Dilma's operations?
The truth is that the company was
created to contribute to the environment
is also part of our
purpose pillar.
And the philosophy of the company's founding is to make business a reason for humanitarian service and cannot serve humanity without respecting biodiversity and the environment.  So, and that's
within all the processes, everything we
do within the company.  We have
created an NGO called Dilma
Conservation and through Dilma
Conservation
we incorporate natural capital into
conservation initiatives,
biodiversity restoration,
education and
environmental awareness.  Also in
climate resilience research, we have
a
private climate change research center, there are
now two in Sri Lanka, and
environmental advocacy, promoting
public policies that protect the environment
together with powerful alliances such as
Biodiversity Sri Lanka and the
UN Global Compact.  Thank you,
Alejandra.  Now I want to move away a
bit from what is purely private and
think a little and have you tell us a
bit about your perspective on
how, through this lens that
international organizations have, one
can understand biodiversity or
natural capital related to an
industry that has been mentioned a lot
here, which has great potential to
use biodiversity in a beneficial way,
such as tourism.  So, how do you
see this?  And if you could also
tell us how you
relate to this concept of
natural capital in your daily life.
Well, good morning to everyone.  And
thank you for the invitation and for
organizing this space.  I think it's
a pleasure to talk about biodiversity
in any space that is created with
a diverse audience, with
diverse interests.  Also, uh, I think I stole your
microphone.  I had it here, I just realized
, sorry.
Well, from the point of view of international organizations, in particular UNDP does not work on its own, but rather works as a link for countries, so that countries can leverage and generate and implement measures through public policies and concrete projects for the benefit of certain priorities that are defined by the countries.  In particular, I
am currently engaged in a very
specific task which has to do with
updating a national
biodiversity strategy.  This is a
very old public policy instrument, it was created
in 2003, it was somewhat forgotten, it was
revived, but I want to tell you that there are 136
countries that are currently updating their
strategy because it is
an element that helps to leverage
different perspectives.  Everyone
here, or everyone who might be watching a live
stream, has a different perspective
on biodiversity.
Therefore, it is important to formalize this connection
together based on
common visions, common goals,
common aspirations, and common efforts.  And
therefore, what exists today is an effort
to look at the goal associated with
commitments from the private sector regarding
biodiversity.  And I believe that
tourism is a sector that can then
provide a
very direct approach and connection associated with the
care of biodiversity.  And all those
who have initiatives or
associated entities in this particular sector
have a different purpose.
So, when Barbara speaks or when the governor speaks about expanding the area of ​​protected areas and Barbara speaks about the need to be immersed in that biodiversity, today there is nothing from the moment we wake up until we go to bed that does not involve the use of that natural capital.  So, adventure tourism and nature tourism are one thing, and how we recognize that biodiversity can then be cared for with respect to each of our activities is another.
Therefore, our task today is to showcase
the opportunities, but also to make
the risks visible.  There are risks
associated with economic losses and there are
risks regarding
climate vulnerability.
We can make all those elements visible and
build upon a
common purpose, a timely perspective so as
not to waste any more time.  Hm.   I
don't want to get into the risks yet
because that comes a little later,
but the question that remains for me is thinking
about the diversity that Chile has,
right?  And I just found out about the different ecosystems
that support this giant tourism industry
.  I
had no idea that compared to
Brazil and Peru, eh, it's important.  ¿Dónde
crees que están las oportunidades más
allá de lo típico San Pedro Atacama,
Torres del Paine, Isla de Pascua?
Yes, it's a good question because today in
Chilean territory 43% of the
surface area is protected marine.  There are
many of those marine protected areas
that no one will ever reach because of their
size, their
geographical characteristics, their difficulties, and there are
other terrestrial areas where
almost 20 or 22% of the terrestrial territory is
protected.  Therefore, rather than defining what the opportunity is in terms of going to do tourism in a protected area, I think the opportunity is to understand that there is a space for tourism with respect to the objective pragmatic line of definitions and there is another that is an element of recreation.
So, we have to navigate that space because there is a lot of tourism, a lot of productive activities that are done without any guidelines, without criteria, without any opportunity for knowledge.  I want to
bring up a message that comes
to mind from the book known to
everyone, The Little Prince, which says, "What is
important is invisible to
people's eyes."  So, when it was
recounted in this masterclass, what
is important?  The important thing when
I go rafting is
that I'm in a visible space, in
a wonderful forest, but people
know what the habitats of that
biodiversity are, what the
important elements of that biodiversity are.
So, I believe there are opportunities
from Arica to Magallanes.  The
important thing is to be aware
of the opportunity and the
direct benefits for the communities.  The
ICAMI Montreal strategy has 23
goals, it has four objectives and I want to
talk about one of them.  One objective
has to do with extended benefits
and the other has to do with
financing.  The others are
similar ones associated with
biodiversity restoration and the protection of those
territories that we still need to
take care of.  The extended benefits and
financing include all
activities, including those related to
tourism.  You just told us about the
high percentage it contributes.  It is
difficult for companies to have
such a high percentage of contribution to
biodiversity conservation.  Chile
today has a
particular activity that is now
visible from the wine industry.  It
is already a program focused on Wine, Climate Change and
Biodiversity, but there is also an
opportunity with
agri-food systems.
Agri-food systems focus on the soil as a place
for planting, without considering the biodiversity
in the soil.  So, every time I
think about accessing a protected area,
I think about a route, about opening a path.
Would widening the route
to reach a protected area be the best course of action in
terms of biodiversity and
tourism?  We recently had the
Farellones incident where
many tourists were trapped.  What will the solution be?   Let
's all think about it, because the
tourism sector isn't the only one with the solution, okay?
So, we need to talk, as
the governor also said, about a set of
elements and opportunities because there is a
significant complexity to the process and we don't
have much time because we can't
keep making mistakes, particularly
regarding biodiversity.
Thank you.  Thank you, Alejandra.
Victor,
it's everyone's problem.  We need someone to give us orders, to coordinate natural capital, and from the Ministry of the Environment, how do you see this issue, this concept of natural capital?
How is it installed?  What are the
challenges?  And if you could tell us a little
more about the natural capital committee
which you chair, why not give us
all a few minutes, I mean.  You have 30
seconds for the Natural Capital Committee matter
.
Uh, first of all, thank you for the invitation, the
show, I mean, the idea
of ​​holding a seminar of this
nature, of this magnitude, is spectacular.  So to the
organizers, congratulations to the
university, Corfo as well for
supporting this, and to all the
organizations.  Um, are
you thinking about how the
question you started with at the
beginning and the truth is that we have very
little time to be able to describe and
answer all your questions?  Uh,
many of those answers are on the
website.
So, I think one of the essential issues is that we are here discussing, in a meeting on biodiversity, in the first panel on natural capital.  I think that says a lot, I mean, I think it
says a lot in the
sense that
people who represent different
sectors of society are sitting down
and we managed to talk and adjust
our discourses, our concepts
of biodiversity,
ecosystem service and we added
natural capital, which is ultimately more or less
the same thing.
Now, the possibility that talking about natural capital gives us is infinite because it allows us to bring together people who have never been at the same table, right?  And I think that's the great
wealth, the great value of the
concept of natural capital, which is
new, isn't it?  It's, let's say, right?  Uh, but
in Chile lately, uh,
surely, and that has to do with knowledge,
right?  As psychologists say, I'm
seeing that a lot of things are happening all the time,
and when you see not
only this meeting, but also what's happening going
forward, Redlc,
etc., you start to have the concept of
natural capital at the center of your
concerns, and I think it's because it allows us to
have an excuse to talk
about a topic that we know is very
important and that has to do with the
care of nature and with the
wealth that nature
provides us.  We are usually
used to talking about natural resources and we
rarely talk about
ecosystem services, right?  And when we put
those two things together—and I'm not going to repeat here
Barbara's brilliant presentation—so we're all
clear on what we mean
when we talk about
natural capital.  Now, what has happened
with the State is that
at some point we realized that
the concept of natural capital was a
relevant issue.
The perspective and approach of natural capital was relevant to public policies and therefore we made the decision to create a natural capital committee that brings together the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Environment and that has CTCI and the Central Bank as its permanent advisory bodies.
In other words, we are talking about the country's economic institutions focused on a specific issue, and whose presidency falls to the Ministry of the Environment.  And
that's really interesting because I know we don't have
much time, so I want to
finish with this idea.
Talking about committees and
natural capital also allows us to shed
this burden and this mask,
answering your question about how we
work on the topic of natural capital on a daily basis. From
the Ministry of the Environment, it's super
relevant because the
industrial and business world sees us
as an obstacle, as a
problem, and they bring up these
grandiose concepts like permitting, right
?  And one wonders, well,
okay, let's eliminate the permit system,
let's go to the other extreme, there should be no
permits for anything,
let everyone do what they want,
anyone, anyone can do what they
want.
It's so absurd to think of that as a possibility that what we really need to do is see how we recognize that nature provides us with goods and services.  And it is, and it is, and it is, and
when we realize that it is
possible to sit down at a table and talk
with others about how we are going to
protect those assets to guarantee
those services, that is when I think the
concept of natural capital emerges and having a
natural capital committee becomes a
natural thing to do.  And that's where the real challenge lies:
how this
concept permeates, and everything
Barbara explained to us at the beginning, how
these concepts permeate not only the
private world, but also
public policies.  And there I believe lies one of
Chile's greatest challenges, which today
falls on the natural capital committee
.
Now, but in a real 30 seconds,
how?
So they'll invite me,
right?  Yes, yes, it's true.  The
question is, considering all the
challenges involved, from the
methodological to the conceptual,
considering the challenges involved in
the term, right?  Desde la
metodología hasta la parte conceptual en
que estamos todos de acuerdo qué es lo
que es y no es otra cosa, cómo se ha ido
incorporando, cómo se planifica su
incorporación en las políticas públicas.
12 seconds for that question.  We're working on
it, we're working on it.  It's not
simple at all, it's super complex because it's not
trivial at all because those of us
here probably
share, uh, understand, or or pretend to
understand, but at the end of the
day, we have to reward
other public services that are not
linked to the issue of
biodiversity, and therefore, I think it's not
that simple.
Things have been happening now, as we see
last week or the week before that the Ministry of
Public Works puts forward a guide, proposes
and releases a guide of
nature-based solutions for construction, and
the Ministry
of Housing is starting to propose nature-based solutions
, that is,
the value of nature
in terms of human activity is beginning to be understood.
We are doing very specific things and
there, well, we also have work with
the international world.
Uh, we are working hard today also with international universities, with Stanford, for example, we have a very interesting project on how to translate the concept and approach of natural capital into public policies.  Do some of you know that
we worked extensively in
previous years in the Ribueno basin in
southern Chile with
Stanford University, and today the next step, and
we obtained several results from that, and
today the next step is, and we
are working on that, is to
translate all those results into
public policy?  What does it mean to
sit down at the table and talk, okay?  This
is what we mean when we talk about
the policies of the MOP, when
we incorporate solutions of a basic
nature.  Is it natural capital?  Isn't that
natural capital?  I think it's a
challenge.  We're working on
that, aren't we?  No, I would say that the stage we
are in today is
installation, not yet
implementation.
Thank you, thank you, thank you, dear Alex.
It's great to share the stage with you,
Alex, from your perspective, from
academia, your participation in
international forums, your expertise in
sustainability, your role as director of master's programs, your role as
center director, etc., etc.,
etc.  How do you see the
incorporation of this concept within
an educational institution like this one or
others, and from a research perspective,
how has progress been made?
Thank you so much for sharing this beautiful panel and seeing you all gathered here on this topic, and seeing old friends from when I had more hair, and friends who are in metropolitan government.  It's like we're still
talking about the same thing as last year
, have you noticed?
Before I completed research, one of my
hats was that I was the lead author
within the IBES report
of the Intergovernmental Panel for
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services of
Nexus Asesma.
I am not an expert in natural capital, you
said it well, let's say, you are an
expert in natural capital, you come from the
finance side, from the
economic side.  So, I'm going to talk about
the technical point of view of
natural capital and first the diagnosis.
Our diagnosis is that,
firstly, in terms of
information,
nobody reads, so we are
today in a new round of EliteBest.   I had the opportunity to
participate as a member of the
IPCC in the IATB and now I have returned to the IPCC
for the upcoming round 7 on
mitigation.
And the problem is that the Nexusment Report, which I don't know if you know, has to do with water, energy, and food security in terms of how biodiversity affects those three components, and these are policy contributions in which ITES, which is like the IPCC, but the biodiversity issue contributes this.  Nobody reads it, and yet it contains the
policies we're all talking about.
So, first, the academy has to,
we try to socialize that because
what we actually do are
postgraduate programs, not in science, but
professional postgraduate programs in which people
come from companies, and I had the opportunity with
Fernando, let's say personally, through
chat, third, but it was really very
difficult to have it in the academy where
this first permeates, in reality, are the
main regulations that you see
as Camin Montreal, which makes you say, Cami,
where does that fit in?  Could it be Caming Street?
No, and people don't really know.
So, our diagnosis is,
firstly, that in policy terms
we have a fragmentation of
governance in terms of
biodiversity.  And what do I mean by
fragmentation of governance?
You go to different parts of the
State, everyone talks about biodiversity,
but there is no entity, therefore, the
fragmentation of governance prevents the
articulation of policy in terms of
that transfer to having what
Víctor says, which is that the MOP has it
in its head or that I don't know
if we are all going to be.
They are talking today about the decarbonization of the port sector, but we have more hygienic problems in the port sector that prevent these issues from being addressed.  So,
this packaging is a fragmentation
of the policy, and the diagnosis
we have at ITBES is that there is
a fragmentation in all governments
in terms of
government entities, in terms of how biodiversity is managed
.  Second,
we have to make our
professionals understand that this has to be
integrated into the accounts, and we
are an engineering faculty, we know
how to conserve nature-based solutions
and whether they are or not, but I cannot
value what you
do in the
business sustainability center.  And in this
context, in Chile the
Ministry of Finance may be interfering in the
national accounts.  Me parece bonito y
hay países que ya tienen sus cuentas
nacionales, pero mientras nosotros no
institucionalicemos la cuenta nacional,
como por ejemplo en el Departamento
Nacional de Estadística, el INE, una
especie como de valoración de que
digamos esto vamos perdiendo, vamos para
arriba, para abajo, esto no va a tener
ningún sentido.  I don't know if it's
understandable.
It's like the obesity indicators, you know what I mean?  The IPCC at
least serves as an indicator that
allows interest rates to be adjusted.  If
we had this within a
statistics department that would
allow us to know whether we are losing or
gaining natural capital, it would allow us to
loosen instruments or design
instruments that allow for the promotion
of the private sector or not.  And that does
n't exist today because there is
fragmentation.  And finally, from an
educational perspective, I think we've
romanticized the concept of
biodiversity to just little trees,
parks, and going for a walk to find
nature as if it were some kind of
hippie movement, and it's not.  In the Nexus Assessment
we see that maintaining
natural capital allows us to maintain
healthy agricultural systems, on which
not only the T, as
you also said, depends, but also
numerous jobs of people who
work at the local level, because it is not the
people from Arica going to work, let's say, in
Sri Lanka, it is not the people who live in
Sri Lanka.  Therefore, the lack of understanding
that maintaining
ecosystem services that depend on that
biodiversity and diversity, which
we call natural capital, already
generates an economic loss or an
economic gain, makes no
sense.  So I think we
still need to figure out how to transfer postgraduate studies to the
new generations of undergraduate students
.
It is very difficult to value the fact that any public-private project has consequences, that it has an economic cost, and ultimately the productive sector, the productivity of our ecosystems basically depends on the maintenance of this.  That's our role.
It's difficult because the regulations don't
support us, because
government entities don't support us.  Okay, fine,
I'll include it in the numbers, but if
Dilma goes and says, "We increased
capital by 10 million dollars, but
nobody's measuring it. There's no
national statistics department, the
national agricultural service isn't interested in
the question you're asking, 'Why am I making
the effort?'" then it simply falls into
something more voluntary.
Institutionalizing these issues, as they should be
done,
allows us in academia to make it much
easier to train the human capital we
need in those stocks
you call the future.
Thank you. Thank you, Alex. And, picking up
on the challenges you mentioned, I want to
move on to the second point we
have planned to discuss
today, which has to do with the progress and
obstacles you identify
in moving beyond the discourse where, since we no longer
meet in all the
same forums, we talk about the
same things, we leave happy, but you look out the
window and it seems like nothing changes.
So, what is needed from your
different perspectives to move from this...
Conviction to action?
And I want to start with Alejandra, so she can tell us
how she sees it, that we move forward first
because we always have to start
positively, and then what challenges
you foresee in order to move from
this declaration to action and generate
effective change.
Yes, I am positive, just so you know. Uh,
yes, I always believe we can do more and that we
are doing better than
yesterday. Ah, and without a doubt, there are several
substantive elements. One has to
do with the appropriation by different
sectors, or rather, the appropriation by some
sectors that know they have to
act
differently, they know they have to measure
biodiversity under whatever concept is being
established today. Uh, there is
another sector that is fearful
of those who will hold me
accountable. If I talk about diversity or say that
I have something important or that I want to do something
, they are going to start watching me, they are going to start
observing me, they are going to start
monitoring me. And I would say that
we have to unblock these processes on the
part of the State and also on the part of
the private sector.  By "private sector" I don't
mean companies, I mean all
sectors. We still have
significant gaps, I think, not
only in the
tourism sector, but also in other sectors that
today intend to
support and contribute to areas related to
biodiversity, but they don't know where to start.
I believe that the link between the
private sector and the transformation of the State
is urgently needed. We can't
continue acting with
systematic distrust because otherwise things won't get off the ground
.
Transparency, the need to contribute, and
funding are also
important elements. We have a
significant amount of
funding that is scattered.
Everyone has or has had experience
applying for a project or
wanting to provide funding. They don't
know where it's best, or they don't know how to
partner up. There are
still some very unclear areas there, not in a
negative sense, I'm not saying this,
but in terms of the
need for clarification. Alex said something
truly brilliant, and it's true. We don't
read the documents,  The
instances. I invite you to visit the
Ministry of Environment's website,
specifically the section on the
National Biodiversity Strategy. There are
short, concise documents that,
conceptually, are very
easy to read, explaining what
biodiversity means and
why we need to understand it. So,
regarding your question, I think there have been
significant and
substantive steps to improve this situation.
We're discussing this here.
We're reaching out to different
sectors to reduce
subsidies that are harmful to
biodiversity, the activities that are
detrimental. And I believe we need to be
transparent about these things; we shouldn't be
afraid to talk about the
issues that continue to damage
biodiversity, and we
need to find incentives,
we need to find and leverage
funding to do
substantive and scalable things. Not everything
happens overnight.
And speaking of incentives,
Víctor,
the Ministry is pushing
several things in terms of
economic incentives.
What do you think? How has the progress been?
What are they?  What challenges
arise in order to scale up? That's what
Alejandra was saying. Yes, she kind of
left me thinking because I think we have a lot to
show there, I think we
all have a lot to feel proud and happy about
because at the end of the day, this is a
job that is never even the work of
a single government, this is a
long road. And speaking of progress,
we have the SVAP law, which is the great
advance of recent years in
environmental matters, not only because it
completes the institutional framework, but
also because it provides the possibility
of generating new visions.
When Barbara was talking about this
paradigm shift, it's something we always
repeat, this paradigm shift and
natural capital, in one way or another,
also comes to break that paradigm of
how we understand conservation, the
protection of nature, and
we are particularly
working, I would say, on three
instruments, actually two
instruments, but there are
three regulations that promote this
recognition of
natural capital. The first, the  Article 38 of—I'm
not going to quote it—the article on
compensation, what we do regarding
biodiversity compensation, which
basically,
in a nutshell, was to generate an improvement on
what already existed. Do you know that in
the entire system we
analyzed, and in the entire
environmental assessment system, there are only 22
biodiversity compensation measures? 22. And none in the sea.
There's a problem. We
certainly have a problem if
we have economic activity in the sea and
on land, and then we didn't have any
in the sea. Well, it makes you ask yourself
certain things. Well, we modernized
that regulation, we created it, and we
were quite pioneering, I would say,
because we established the objectives as
goals, the fulfillment of the goal and not just
the action. So, you no longer supervise
whether you planted the tree, but whether you
actually achieved the
contribution to
biodiversity, and I think that's an
important issue. Second, it has to do with—
and this is super innovative in
Chile—we have a regulation on
certification of contribution to
biodiversity, and  Ecosystem services,
and that's where we're working. We have a
long discussion, but basically, in a
nutshell,
we're going to have two things within that economic instrument.
One is a seal that recognizes,
as Dani mentioned at the beginning,
sites, practices, and actions that
benefit biodiversity. But on the
other hand, we're going to have
another type of certificate,
strictly from a legal point of view, so we do
n't make any mistakes. This certificate is
called UGB, which is the
Biodiversity Management Unit.
We discussed this at length the other day
elsewhere.
This Biodiversity Management Unit will
define, given a
certain ecological equivalence,
units based on
standards outside the
ministry—currently
international standards, because in Chile we don't
have a national standard—and it will create
units that can be tradable once.
And this is what we're looking for: to
mobilize resources
from the private sector, and even the
public sector, including
regional governments, towards
conservation through these units.
Management. And finally, we are
working on contracts for
remuneration for ecosystem services,
which are essentially known abroad
as PCAs, payments for
environmental services. This also
establishes a new instrument that didn't
exist in Chile, and I believe it's
progressing. In practice, we
are implementing a GUEF project
on economic instruments. The
team presenting here—AM, who
will be presenting here this afternoon,
and the rest of the team—
changed the name to "
incentives for conservation" because
it seems that "economic instruments" is
n't popular or sounds bad.
But since we're here and
can talk calmly about
economic concepts, what it
effectively seeks is how to
add value to what
nature already provides to
communities, for example. And we are
testing
different
economic instruments through SEF in six different sites, instruments that
contribute to the design of
public policy. So I think it's good.
And the last thing to say regarding
this seminar is the
sustainable tourism strategy.  He proposes, within
his proposal, the establishment of
a payment for ecosystem services, and we
are working on that jointly between
the Undersecretariat and the Ministry. So,
things are happening, and more.
Alex, and just thinking about all these
things that are happening and all the
efforts the Ministry is making regarding
incentives to promote
the conservation of natural capital, from
your perspective and with the insight gained from
your participation in various
international forums,
what would be the most urgent changes
to better coordinate these
efforts so that we don't remain
isolated? We've talked about this a
lot today, right? What
institutional changes, the adjustments
that need to be made so that this
issue starts to function a bit
more harmoniously, and without so much
tension between different perspectives? And do you
think we have the possibility of
becoming some kind of benchmark,
at least regionally, in matters of
natural capital conservation, or rather,
management rather than conservation
? That's a bit of a
chauvinistic question, but, well
, I think we have been
innovative in creating instruments because
we are quite  Creative. I think the
challenge isn't about what
Víctor is doing, what
Dilma is doing, or what the National Development Plan (PND) is doing
. I think the challenge is about ensuring that
the people who will be
the users of the
economic instruments understand those instruments. I
mean, what Víctor is talking about, what the
UNDP is doing.
The question is, I know Dilma
understands it, but does Dilma understand that
complexity, like other companies
understand that complexity, and understand that
the issues are starting to converge?
The main challenge, first of all, is to
move beyond this fragmented governance we
see in states, because it
is fragmented. I mean, I don't think
a single person in charge of diversity in
each ministry can answer that question. In
fact, you said it, Alejandro,
we have different funds from different
entities. Let's coordinate, let's sit down and talk. And I think
, look, a great example was
the climate change law, which
allowed us to organize the climate change discussion
in terms of a framework law
that would allow us to create instruments and
coordinated entities. And notice that it
provides a logical framework; it's not perfect, but it
gives a logical framework to all the
existing regulations. I think the SVAB
is one thing, but we still need a
framework instrument that
allows us to organize this fragmentation of
governance. That's one aspect from the private sector's point of
view, from the universities' perspective—it's about
understanding this complexity. I'll
tell you a little about what's coming, and with this I
want to conclude. First, what
Víctor mentioned is very important;
nature-based solutions are in vogue, and everything fits under that umbrella
. Unfortunately, it's not that simple
. My task now—I'll
say it—is to deliver
the United Nations
Climate Technology Progress Report for COP 30.
We're writing the next report,
which is on bioeconomy, which we have to
deliver in Brazil, driven by the
Brazilian government. I'm
writing the chapter on bioeconomy in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
Bioeconomy is going to have a strong impact, and that's
linked to the exploitation of
natural capital, but also to the return on
natural capital. Metrics for investing in
nature.  Green bonds and blue bonds
need a logical framework, because
I also understand the private sector. If
we're going to make the investment effort, there
has to be some kind of return, and
that can only be provided by
legal certainty,
institutional certainty, and
reducing the volatility of all
those investments that ultimately have to be
channeled through this
certificate instrument—an economic instrument, which
I know you don't like the word, but it
is an economic instrument.
Yes, me too, but it has to be this way
because the complexity is there, and my question
is, are we—the
tourism sector,
the private sector, NGOs—understanding the complexity of
what's coming? I mean, just imagine,
you used some terms, and I
think if I raise my hand, who
understood everything Víctor said?
I think less than 30% understand it. And
that needs to be brought into the traditional legal framework
. I don't know if I'll understand,
for example, today there's a
park policy, but what does park have to do
with it? So I think we
need today—and here's the
plug—
people
The rate of professional training in Chile is low. Here, a professional might get an MBA, sure, but that's not the point. We need people who are technically trained, not in one specific area, but in more complex areas, in more investment models that take advantage of the available instruments so that Víctor doesn't waste his time, so that the UNDP doesn't tell us, "Look, there are all these funds, 84 billion dollars, but they amount to nothing," or perhaps when they do start to arrive, the metropolitan government faced a ton of legal obstacles to implementing a project, and then when we go looking for projects—and I'll wrap this up—there aren't any, that's the truth, there are no projects. We haven't spoken with the National Development Plan, etc. You go and look for a project portfolio, and there's no project portfolio. So, I don't know the solution to unblocking this, but I do believe that training is relevant to understanding what each of you is saying and to ensure that these ideas don't just stay in these committees we work with, but are transformed into more implemented projects.  land. That's it.
Well, no, since Alex didn't want to say
that he had a master's degree in
sustainability management from the Faculty of
Engineering, I'm saying that, right? There, so they can go and get
trained.
Yes. Uh, Daniela, uh, I wanted to
ask you if the lessons you've
learned from the company in this
transition, which has definitely been from
the beginning, right? But that doesn't
mean it hasn't been without its
challenges. If you could tell us about the lessons
learned and how this allowed or has
allowed you to improve the relationship
you have with nature.
Of course, of course. Look, one thing we
found that is intrinsic,
that is necessary, that is essential,
is to consider—it sounds very basic—
but to consider that all the resources
invested in
biodiversity conservation and sustainability should be
considered an investment and
not a cost.
This, on the part of private companies, of
organizations,
has to be seen as an investment,
it's a tool, and that's how
we put it in Dilma and in this way
we manage. We have already invested
more than  23 billion dollars.
How? By focusing on that, and also
with awareness, the
exact clarity that without biodiversity,
there is a risk to the
long-term sustainability and resilience of the
company. No, there is no other way. It is a
strategic tool and it is an
investment. That is something we learned
very clearly.
And in terms of the relationship with the
communities, everything is transmitted, right?
Yes. Yes, absolutely. In fact, what
Alex was saying, we have
created part of one of the hundreds of
projects we have in Sri Lanka, the
Genesis Center, which is a center for
technological innovation,
where we bring together all the stakeholders so that they can
share information—from
expert technicians, the community,
teachers, academics—so that
projects emerge
that are for the common good in terms of
biodiversity and conservation, but
that also communicate that it is a
meeting place. That is what we have created.
Thank you. Thank you, Daniela.
Topic number three.
I want us to discuss, I want you to
tell us a little about the opportunities
you see for working
together. Or  So, one of the
clear things, one of the messages we
can take away today, is that this won't be achieved
with just one actor, one
institution, or one sector
. So, how do you see
the real options for working
together in order to generate
impacts in the territory?
And let's start with Víctor. How do
you see, Víctor, the spaces for
collaboration between government and the private sector,
between government and academia, and
civil society? Because one way or another,
those instruments you
mentioned will have a daily impact on
the companies and communities where they are
applied. Hopefully. Wait.
What's happening? Well, it's happening to me because
this question seems to be asked in every
forum, and it's
like the devil himself, as if
these spaces exist, they are
happening. We don't make
public policy locked away in an office; we do it by
discussing policies.
In Chile, we have a
citizen participation law that doesn't
obligate us, but at the same time allows us to
present  Everything of this type. For example, the regulations I just mentioned have gone through an early citizen participation process, a public consultation. So, I want to be optimistic about that. I believe that's happening. In these forums, you listen and say, "Hey, look, how interesting, later I'll get in touch so we can talk." We ourselves discuss things—academia, me from the government, you from academia, and Alex himself with the UNDP—we have a systematic, ongoing collaboration. We do the taxonomy, the long-term biodiversity strategy, together. ALE works with the UNDP, but has an office in the ministry, so to speak. In other words, we discuss, we are part of the technical teams that contribute to the work of the UNDP and vice versa. What I mean is that, normally, that question is answered in all the forums: yes, we needed more space for collaboration. Ah, we do have spaces for collaboration. From the Natural Capital Committee, we created a public-private working group, which in fact
There are people participating in that roundtable, and it's been a complete success. It's been a complete success because there are many companies that are extremely interested in this topic, some of which are very far ahead in terms of their natural capital mission, like Arausco and Conchitoro, which are there.  in the
game and others so that they don't get angry,
uh, and others that at the other extreme, some
that are not interested at all, but in between there are
several that are looking at this
and are participating in that committee and what
we decided to do, look what we did to do
in that committee, the action
we decided to take was to have by
December a design of
a methodological guide for the
incorporation
of natural capital within
companies
between the public world from the
natural capital committee and
private companies.  So that's what's happening today
.  Speaking of
good news, in Chile we
have a social bonus, a green bonus, and
now we have a biodiversity bonus.
Well, the bond doesn't exist yet, but we have
already launched
the principles
for issuing a
biodiversity bond from the Ministry of Finance.  That's tremendous.  That's
a
global border issue, isn't it?  Therefore, and this is defined by the state
, but ultimately it is the private sector that
buys that bond.  Therefore,
this is being done together.  There's no
way any of us
can do it alone because it's great
that the Dilma company is doing it and
we see the video and we all want to go
to Clanca, but of course, in
practice that also requires that there are
others who are participating in that
conversation because otherwise it's too
local even though the
solutions are indeed territorial.  I think I
have it, and since this is the last
thing I'm saying, I think we're on
the right track.
No, it's not the last thing you say because since you
found the obvious question,
then comes the counter-question.
Sorry, but
no, I'm sorry I can't let it slide.
Hey, Victor, but it's okay,
yes, many things and
many relationships have been built, but what's the
lesson?  What is the biggest barrier
that had to be overcome in order for
different stakeholders to sit down and talk
about a topic?  Undoubtedly,
prejudices exist from all sides—ours,
from private companies, from the world—we
all think that the other person has 1000
flaws, and we find it very difficult to
think that nobody is perfect, that there are
no perfect institutions.  I
believe the key is
sitting down knowing that these prejudices
exist, and that despite these
prejudices you have common goals, and
focusing attention on those common goals
and not on the problems,
because when we from the
Ministry of the Environment
sit down with the company, if we're not going to
talk about the issues, we'll
never finish.  If the
objective of talking about natural capital is
a discussion that has to be set
aside, that's another thing we've
learned: that discussions have to
be focused on what brings us together
and not on related issues or
learned discourses.  I
mean, this idea that all
companies are predators of the
environment and on the other hand,
that all the people in the government,
specifically the Ministry of the
Environment, are all
obstacles to development.  In other words,
those cartoons have to be left out
if we don't want to sit down and have a
serious conversation.
Thank you, Alex. From the academy, in this
interaction of actors, in your opinion, are we
doing enough?  Here I
put on my academic hat.  We are
doing enough to provide
data and evidence to inform
this decision-making.
No,
firstly because
from an academic point of view we have
a very big challenge which is to
generate measurement and
methodological instruments that allow us to quantify
this.  So, if someone says, "I'm going to
caricature it, please. I'm going to
plant a seagrass meadow.
Now."  And I want to ask for a platform, because I have
Gorfo friends here, who
will also capture emissions.  I need to have
a standardized methodology.  I think we've
lost focus.  I believe that
today we have made few
methodological proposals.
Second, we in academia struggle to
understand
that what I get from a paper is not
public policy,
that what we do in academia is not
prescriptive,
and I think we lack an understanding of how
public policy works.  In my
case, because I had, I don't know, the opportunity to
be part of the Advisory Council of the
Ministry of the Environment during
three administrations and to participate in the
Paris Agreement, and that's where you learn.  Already.
So, in that context, I think we're not
doing enough because
when we go to forums we think they're going to
ask for our opinion as beings who have just come
down from Mount Olympus,
this is the truth, the latest paper, right?
Okay, so let's get off our high horse,
academically speaking, because they're actually
asking for our vision of what can
or cannot be measured.  So, what you want to
know, Victor, you want to know from an
economic point of view, that is to say, let's
see, do we have a standard methodology
to know how much a Lesonia
Grressen captures in the rocky
or non-rocky interstitial zone?  It's not that the latest one, no, if I'm not
interested in the latest paper, do we have it or
not?  And I think one is going to give opinions in
a context where what they want is what we don't want;
I hate this word, but I'm
going to use it.  like what they call
gringable knowledge.  We need to
transform the knowledge from the paper into
useful tools that allow us to have
measurement instruments so that when
Dilma or someone else says, "I'm going to
invest in, for example, co-crops or I'm
going to invest, for example, in
native species to flank, for
example, or promote, I don't know, uh, bees,
I can know how much I'm contributing, how I
measure it, and that it's useful. It's not perfect,
but it should be useful."  And that's where we're in
tremendous debt.  We still participate in
forums more as giving opinions
than turning the knowledge we
have into something useful that allows
decision-makers or those
working on the ground to
apply it, and we have a lot of
debt there.
We completely agree with that.
Daniela, do you have any recommendations
if a company wants to
move towards the conservation,
preservation and useful and
sustainable management of natural capital?  What
have you learned in Dilma during
all these years that you've been using this
type of strategy?
Look, one, well, whatever we're talking about
here and what Alex was saying at that exact
moment, do it based on
scientific evidence.  Therefore, we need the
private sector to have the support of
academics and scientists to
guide us on how to do
things, how to measure them, and how to obtain
concrete results.
And we're
not doing so badly.  So yes,
Alejandra, let's go back to Tourism to wrap things up
.  So, how do you see the
opportunities for the tourism sector to
incorporate the issue of natural capital and for it to
effectively become a
fundamental element for its economic development
?
And I think that it incorporates it, there is
no need to give a numerical concept
or a numerical concept to
the tourism that is done.  Rather, what
I would say is that what needs to be
done is to translate to the tourism sector how it
is using that natural capital.  Already.
And in that sense, the integration of
natural capital, and tourism, and the
tourism sector, and in everything we do, as I
said, from the moment we wake up until we go to
sleep, has to do with
understanding the practical space I
occupy.  Already.  And I think the
tourism sector has some
important challenges in order to be
effective in that regard.  One that has to
do with, many of you may know
, uh, with the issue of the appropriation
of that tourism in the
territorial sense,
tourism in the north is no longer the same as tourism in
Magallanes and tourism in the
metropolitan region.  It is not the same for a tourist
who goes to the city and who
can also do nature tourism.
I think there's a task there.  The
regional government here is doing it, but I don't
know if the government of the
Biobío region, the government of
Antofagasta, is doing it; there are many other problems.
Uh, but I think the opportunity is to
understand simple things.  Ah, what is
natural capital?  How can
I use it to benefit my company?  and
how that extension of benefits reaches
the communities, but also how I
safeguard biodiversity.  The
Andean parks, ah the extremes, sleep, they go into
a dormancy ah in
extreme winter situations to
recover from the intensity.  The
same thing is happening in other
places, but with a different intensity.  So,
the opportunities we have to do
tourism throughout Chile also
have to do with recognizing that
nature, that behavior.
César must be around here, I don't see him
there.  He has a lot of experience at the
marine level regarding that
behavior.  So, learning
from specialists,
researchers, or those who practice
conservation like WCS is also very
important for tourism and
for people who also have to
obey rules.  I have rules in my house
, in yours, in ours, but we
also have agreements.  It isn't true?
So, that's what we need to
leverage, expand, and improve.
So, we agencies aren't
from the stratosphere either; we're
people who have grown in our
experience and knowledge.  Yo en
tengo la fortuna de haber entendido la
política pública.  Making public policy
is very difficult.  Ah, very difficult.
I have worked in an NGO, in an organization, applied for projects, wanted to convince others that biodiversity is important for their activity and today in this other space.  And all those spaces are very
different, but if we push them all to
have the same vision and put
words to basic agreements, I
think it's not that difficult.  Uh, it's
long, but I believe in it.
Thanks, Alejandra, you're making me think it's over
.  Don't
worry, I only have 2 seconds left.
Just so I can summarize
today's conversation in three words
.  Urgency, complexity, and
collaboration.  That is what should
drive and motivate us in what is to come, so that we
can effectively manage
natural capital better and truly
improve the lives of
communities.  Um, I just wanted to thank you for
this space, thank the
organization for inviting us, and well, it's
always a pleasure to share and meet up
with old friends here.  Thank you.
M.